---
layout: post
title: "Broadening Horizons"
date : 2015-09-26
---
A lot has happened in the last week.

I switched text editors.  I have been using Sublime Text for the last year, and I'm working on Visual Studio Code.  I had briefly used Brackets and Atom, but each time I found myself losing coding time to figure out the new tool.  I've committed to switching to Code because I want to follow what CSG Pro is doing.  Ken Howard is a developer I've been talking to over the last few months.  He's a front-end developer with Angular, and he loves Code and TypeScript.  TypeScript is going hand in hand with Angular 2, so I want to put myself in the position to be competite for that kind of work.  I've looked into TypeScript a little bit, and it works really well with Code, so I'll probably be refactoring some of the Angular projects with TypeScript soon.  I also want to start building Angular apps with express and gulp just so I can keep up on the full stack side of the development.

I've also realized that looking for front-end work as a junior level dev isn't going to get me anywhere, and that I need to be expanding into more backend work.  In the last day, I've thrown myself into WordPress, again relying on Treehouse as a start. It's hard to watch so many videos but I'm a lot like my son right now: just taking it all in.  I completed the php track months ago, before JS Immersion, so recognizing the code is coming back, and I'm starting to see the benifits of cms's.

I've also started looking for different forms of work.  My wife and I are workaholics, and personally, it drives me insane, even with a young child at home, to not have work to do.  It's the intrinsic motivation, and we're going to be those parents that would rather spend the majority of their time working than with our family.  Bad news for the kids, good news for the boss.  I talked to some salesmen at a meetup, and he told me Comcast is hiring, so I applied for a technitian job.  I'd love to be able to write full stack javascript apps, or even just code all day but I'm at the point where I'd rather have a job that I hate and be looking for another job than to be struggling with looking for the job I want.  It's basically like I'm back where I was a year ago when I left education.  I wasn't thrilled about coding, I just wanted a job where I could make a good living and if I got to like the work a little, that would  be great.  This is an interesting mindset, since I'm in the military and I could have been working for them this week but that's an area that I really don't want to be.  It's like I'll do anything...but work in education and work for the military.  I have a lot of respect for that work and for those that do that work, but it's not for me and at least I know what it's like to have been there.