---
layout: post
title: "2016 Retrospective"
date : 2016-12-25
---

It's been a while since I've written a blog for this site, and as I was putting my son to bed after a long christmas day, I started thinking of a few posts I should write, this being one of them.  

Others to follow: 
- Something about a large overview and opitions on Python and the frameworks I've used from the perspective of a node developer
- A introductuion to ngrx store and effects.  More on both of these later.

For the sake of not offending someone, I'll be reducing names.  If you want to know who it was, you can ask me or figure it out on my own.  PDX is a small place, and if you piss someone off, be ready for them to get their revenge on you.

2016 started off not so good for me: My wife had gone back to work, and I had more or less given up on the job hunt.  After months of looking and doing everything I could with no avail, it seemed best to just keep learning and enjoy being a stay-at-home dad.  At that time, my son was 4 months old, and we found a daily rhythm, which at this point is hard to remember, but went something like this: He'd sit in some rocker while I ate breakfast (after I gave him a bottle), I'd play guitar for him for a while, probably give him another bottle, he'd take a nap, I'd work on something (probably the ionic 1 app), he'd wake up like 3 hours later, we'd do nothing together for the rest of the day, I'd probably do some stuff around the house and maybe make dinner, and Olivia would come home to put him to bed.  

There was some trigger in December that got me motivated to start looking again, and sometime in January, G posted on the pdx startup slack board job-board channel that he needed a junior to medium dev to do html email templates.  I responded something to the effect that I was definately capable.  A phone conversation followed, along with me digging into the best google search had for documentation on writing html email templates, then an interview that was cancelled on the day, but finally an interview.  

This was a kinda crazy interview: It was a huge panel, but I picked up who I needed to talk to and who I needed to ignore: Mostly K, who I actually recognized from the code school.  At that time, she didn't leave herself with a very good impression, but I knew that if I wanted to make it in this industry, I'd have to make it work with people even if they weren't ideal to work with. Between her and G, they gave the impression that they valued my studies from the code school, and moved to make it work with me as a contractor.  Emails wans't something I really wanted to do and there was a lot of bad reviews on this particular company, but I needed production experience. I figured I'd do the best I could and when it came time to leave, I'd be able to find work easier than before.

Debugging issues on email templates was hard but I enjoyed the challenge.  I got to know some of the querks between the different browsers, and often became frustrated with qa even though they made my work better. There were some challenging personalities to work with, and some really great, and I'd say in general, I really liked the people I worked with, I was diplomatic where there were differences in opinions, and I was professional.  When I didn't have an email to work on, I studied node with node school, and my manager got me involved on maintaining an in house project.  It was an angular 1 app with php, and frankly it was written poorly but worked.  I had the time to refactor it so the php was used approapriately and the angular pieces were more module and easier to maintain.  I think I took a huge single file angular 1 controller and broke it into roughly 5 controllers with their own view, added in form validation, and stripped out all of the php from the templates. Lesson learned: If you're going to use an opinionated js framework like Angular, let Angular do the work for you. Don't use a server side language like php to do stuff the front-end should be doing. Second, spa's only need a lightweight rest api.  The js does the heavy lifting.   Sure, have form validation in both places, but don't use templating syntax for the server side stuff where html and javascript is sufficient.

Another project I took on was a ui library for email templates.  In the emails I worked on, there was a lot of duplicate code, and when I reused pieces that had been used on previous emails, the email would go through qa a lot faster because there would be fewer bugs.  There was at the time some css framework that had something like this, but it wasn't a perfect solution, so I took the initiative with the support of my manager to start saving these component based css pieces of html with inline css into a directory.  This process led me to not only reuse these components, but to also refactor and improve the code I had previously written.  There was a point where I stopped doing all the css inline to using a separate css file, and using a build tool to move the css to inline within the template.  There's tools that do this, and what I had invisioned was a cli tool where a developer could write an email with current html css standards, run a command on the cli to build it, and the css would be implemented into the email template such that you could write with `div`'s and they would be convered to `table` tags.

Unfortunately, I never got that far with the project.  My contract was ended in May, after 4 months.  A lot of the work I had been doing on emails had been moved to a cheeper solution overseas and I left in what I considered good terms.  I requested K to provide me with a recommendation on LinkedIn that was never provided, but all of the people I worked directly with were willing and were very helpful at getting me the next gig.

Before the html email gig, I had another conversation that started from something on pdx startup slack.  It turned into a lengthy phone conversation, where my son was chillin in his rocker peacefully for the over an hour conversation that seemed mostly cultural.  The guy came across like he cared, I told him I can produce but I lack experience, and he said he'd send me something to work on to see where I was at.  Well, he never did, but jump to June, and my old manager, G, is doing some work for him and his wife is working for him.  Well, I reached out to this guy again, time went by, and I was actually getting some serious looking leads.  I interviewed at Daimler and was really excited about it. It was for a front-end team, Angular 1, and there was a question about documentation.  I said something like "The code should speak for itself", which wasn't the right answer for this group.

I've thought a lot about that question since then: If you're using an opinionated framework like Angular, you'll be limited on how you do things, so for someone new to come in and maintain something, if they don't know they framework, they need to read up on the framework.  Inline comments eat up space, and like I said in the interview, I compaired it to reading music: I've had to read music where there were circles around everytime a note was flat or sharp as defined by the key signature.  If you read the key signature and was diciplined to stay in that key, then those circles are distracting you from everything else that's going on like paying attention to the conductor and reading what the composer wants you to read.  You don't need to add a ton of stuff.  That's not to say I never added stuff in, but when I did, it was very intentional.  

Now with specific to coding, there are additional tools that solve this problem: Unit tests and for angular then you have Typescript.  I like them both, and still add in-line comments.  I'm weak on unit tests, but from every project I've worked on, I've used a tdd method.  I just don't have the tests written.  So I'll write a feature where I know what should happen, run the app, check the browser, and change course as needed.  Writing automated tests would be much better, but with the time I had, that's what I was able to do and still deliver on time.  Clients don't care about unit tests, and the saying goes if you know how to write them, then you'll develop features much faster.  As far as typescript, I'm not the best at it, but it's helped me in a lot of places later on, which I'll go into.

So I answered a question in the way they didn't like, and that kept me from getting that gig.  Lesson learned: For some devs (and this is because I worked with people that shared my opinion), inline documentation is probably a best practice, but again should be deliberate and conscise.

Regardless to that gig, shortly after, that guy I had talked to before the last gig reached out: He had an employee that wasn't producing.  We went out for a beer, and it was my favorite type of interview as of yet: It was a conversation.  We talked about several things like my service with the military and culture related concerns but the job was mine. His guy wasn't producing and his guy didn't need the gig. The concern was with the client, like if they'd be ok with making the change.  He said this client has years of work for them, and he said a lot of what sounded like good things about the culture of the company: His background was a dev, the team was small and worked remotely but had an office at WeWork in Portland, the pay would be up to current standards, and everyone works hard together.  It was a python/angular consultant type shop and I'd have the oppertunity to do some stuff in python so if/when I picked up on python I could use it to make it stick.

Now, not sure if I would do this again: He told me he would meet with the client the next day and if the client was good with the change, then he'd hire me.  I knew he'd drive back to where he lived so I figured if he had good news for me, he'd let me know before he hit the road. Noon came and went, I was disappointed, and sent him a message that evening that sounded like "It must have not worked out, what a shame, good luck, maybe we can make it work later on".  I had several leads, and it's a gig economy.  Well, turns out he was looking at his book and he gave me the gig.  He put me on contract for less than I was doing at the email gig, but I was ok with it because it was on work that I wanted to do and the culture sounded like a good fit.

Onboarding was brief.  I jumped in and contributed/closed github issues and within a week, the client was telling the owner how happy he was with me. Things seemed to be looking good, I was moved to salary which came with a small pay increase.  I asked for my contract to be updated and I trusted my boss to do his job, but I never saw that contract update but things seemed to be going well so I didn't want to rock the boad.

After working wiht the email gig, where it was an agency type environment, I was starting to itch to work in a SaaS environment where the quality of the code mattered more to the enduser than burn and churn.  A client has 3 things: time, money, and quality.  Pick 2.  Most of the time, it's time and money.  Quality is subjective, and you're devs should be able to write good code fast.

Another thing about working with clients: If they were great to work with, they wouldn't need you.  They're going to be weird, they're going to be difficult, because if they weren't then they wouldn't need you.  Apply that to any one that needs you and compensates you with a paycheck.  They're not your friend, even if they want you to think they're a nice guy. I hate it, but I have been burned too much to not completely believe this.  Give me a job, let me stay there for over a year, have my back when I need it, and you'll be an exception to the rule.  Sorry, I got this with working in education, the military, and tech is no different.

So this particular client started getting weird, and me and another guy were no longer needed.  I was doing angular 1 work for them on this aweful project, but it was the first big angular spa I had worked on so I got a lot of great experience.

After that project, my boss told me to build the ui on an inhouse app.  He gave me some ideas about what it was, and gave me the impression that I could use it as an oppertunity to learn how to use angular 2, which had just been officially 2.0.0 released.

I barely got into user auth with registration and login before I was put onto another client.  Paint this picture: I had 8 weeks to build this app.  I was responsible for the front-end, and there was another guy on the backend.  So I started with creating the project with the angular cli (like I had with the previous project) and started getting it up to speed with the inhouse project then hit a wall. For 1, I got a bunch of feedback from the client, like a 55ish page Word document describing the features in no particular order. Along with some guidance from my boss, like I should send a weekly status report for the first 4 weeks, then move onto direct meetings.  There was a face to face online meeting where the client basically met the devs, and there was a third guy in the mix that would just be the guy to fill in the gaps.

Throughout the project, the backend guy was dependant on what I wanted to do.  He wasn't leading.  He was a senior dev of much more years of experience than I had.  That third guy was involved in additional projects, and frankly was able to give some helpful feedback but very little in contributing to code.  So this was the issue: This thing needed to be done, and I was going to deliver it on time above expectations.  Could I come through? I would get that question, and I would want to give an explaintion detailing the situation, but the people writing my paychecks just wanted a "yes" or "no" answer.  What happened to the support that you sold me on to work here?

The backend dev was great.  He was juggling other projects, he didn't take the lead, but he wrote a great api and helped me when I needed.  Toward the end, he also added some front end stuff that I was running out of time with.  But to be clear, me, with less than a year of day to day professional software development was the lead developer on this project and was using tools that no one in this company could help me with.  Had I not delivered, then yes I should have gone with something else but that wasn't the case.  Again, I repeate, I delivered on time above the expection of the client. 

So what does "done" mean?  Does it mean you hit a date and you stop working on it? Does it mean the software was perfect from the developer standpoint? Like a full set of tests are written, it can't break anywhere, and needs no future maintanance? If that's what you want, then you give up time or money and that's on the person that created/negotiate the contract.  No one on my team gave me a definition of what "done" meant.  No one told me what the date was when this contract ended until I pushed them for it after the 7th week. What "done" meant to me was that the features the client wanted was existing by the end of the 8th week.

So to take a break from this storm, there were some great things I learned, and a lot of it was from React.  It kinda comes down to rxjs: maintaining state and creating reusable components.  I was using typescript, angular 2, bootstrap 4, and a host of third party vendor components because I was strapped on time.  I picked up on some patterns that have blown my mind, and I'll be giving a presentation on ngrx at the January PDX Angular meetup.

All during this process, I created the map on which features to work on. I created github issues for each week.  I set up the continous integration, and the github integration on slack.  I drafted weekly status reports to the client.  Midway throught the process another person in the company was added to be the person to handle the client.  Not sure what that person actually did aside from cater to the clients needs and give them those answers like "Yes, it will be done on time" with no level of detail on what "done" means.  I love having people that will do that job, but if I'm involved in that process at all, transparency means a lot to me.  And at the end of week 8, I was the one that demoed the app to the client.  My boss and the backend dev were on the call, but it was me, the junior dev, demonstrating what the app could do, what their money got them.  It was the mvp.  The client said he was happy with it.

After that meeting, I took care of some other issues in my life and didn't look at my computer for that weekend. Prior to that, I was stressed out about getting features done each week, I was working weekends, I was putting this job ahead of my family.  This was not the culture this guy had told me about.  I asked for help, and when I got responses, they were like "I'll try if I have time later" or "Maybe we should dump everything we have as we're halfway through the project and use another javascript framework".  There were bugs, because I was burn and churning, so I got back to work on Monday, and the client provided another Microsoft Word document with a list of things that should be addressed in no particular order but he did provide essentially labels that could be summed up to "must be done" "post mpv", and "requires conversation".  Well most were "must be done".  Some were fairly easy, some not so much, and I very much enjoyed fixing those issues.

This was around Thanksgiving.  This company claimed for "unlimited paid time off", and this was the test. I was going out of town for a couple days to visit family.  I had worked well more than what this client was paying for with weekends and days that were over 10 hours regularly.  There were also days where it came time for me to go pick up my son from day care and I was in the middle of a feature with a bug, and I couldn't get back to that bug until later. Often this might mean waking up at 3 am unable to sleep because I had worked through the problem in my head and couldn't think of anything else to be able to go back to sleep so I would go work, and that 10 hour day would turn into longer.  No time for being healthy like really even eating lunch or going to the gym.  I was working my ass off on this app, I had something to prove.  I would deliver on time above expectations.

So the question came up: Is the app going to be ready by the first of December (which appearently is when the client was no longer paying for this company to do the work).  Not something I wanted to answer in one word response, I was stressed out, and I didn't need these conversations or to lie and set false expectations.  I would not say the app would be ready because there were issues that I did not know the time they would take to complete.  So I may have pissed off the person that was handling the client because I refused to cater to her single response answer, but I maintained control of development and I was transparent about what would need to be done. I said I'd be out of town, and would probably work more that I would like to.  The rest of the team, how convenient, said they'd be working through the holiday.  

So yes, I worked a few hours on Thanksgiving and the days around it.  I knocked out the majority of the work well ahead of what I was fearing would take. December 1 came and I sent in my last github commit believing the app was delivered on time ahead of expectations of the client.  

My boss, near that midnight point of the development, told me to go back to working on the in house app.  Sometime around that, he also propted a conversation with the team members about a retrospective, and in private he did the same thing.  To be clear, I asked for feadback.  During the development, in the couple of times he asked about the app, I asked for feedback and in those cases he said he didn't really know because he hadn't paid any attention to it.  2 weeks later he called me on a morning where I was close to finishing the app after requesting for feedback on what the api models meant, and he fired me.  It was an issue of culture.  There were things that had taken me longer than they should have.  With the needs of his company, they need someone more senior level.

Some interesting things about this.  First, let's get the elephant out of the room.  The person that was handling the client was a friend.  Our families socialized outside of work.  She sarcastically insulted me about things like being boring because I wanted to talk to her about tech (coding) and about playing the clarinet in the military and I sarcastically insulted her about not being a develper, about being a saleman, and being canadian.  No harm no foul.  But she took something I said and lashed out out of the blue privately.  I immediately appologized, and I told this person how I would expect them to figure out how to get me fired from my job. Did that happen? I don't know. Is it possible? Absolutely.  Was I wrong? Absolutely.  I should have never opened up to the people I work with and to never be sarcastic with them, particularlly online when the context is more vague.  Is it possible this person could keep me from getting a job in tech in Portland ever again? Absolutely.  Regardless, I recommend people to her and to use this company and act professionally about this company.  This will be the only place I publically mention this mostly because I doubt anyone will read this.

Second, this employer had shared some opinions in the past about what a senior developer is.  Like "What makes a developer a senior?", as in that lable doesn't mean anything.  I never really had a junior dev position where I could relax and rely on mentors to baby me through.  I'm actually in the middle of a project where I am mentoring someone. I'm very transparent, and using a lot of what I carry from being a teacher to help this person and this person is helping me on a project.  What I consider a senior developer now is based off of what I did on that project where this guy said I took longer than it should have. I never aggreed to be a project manager, even though I kinda liked those responsibilities, where I was directly communicating with the client, mapping out the big picture, and scaffolding features particuarlly that I had never written before.  Yes, managing state should not have taken me so long to figure out...but that had never been something I had done before. Using a framework that is a rewritten version with bagage from the previous framework...and not having any direct help...That's a problem a senior handles. And I never said I was a senior dev when I pursued this job.

So the culture definately shifted.  I've got a ton of experience now from that project, and frankly from a year ago I have an incredible depth of experience.  I see a lot of jobs that say they want a senior dev with 5 years experience.  I also hear things like it only matters what you've done in the last 2 years.  Well, I've been writing code every day for the last 2 yaers.  I taught a lot of people how to write code, like at the code school, I've mentored friends that have been struggling to get jobs, I've taught myself a lot of design patterns and languages, and I've figured out how to be successful in both a corporate type role and in a start up type role.  Coming into 2017, I'm confident I'll find a gig within the last month.  I have a lot to offer. I don't know very many people with the resilency and work ethic that I have.  I've got some friends that are helping me out, and I've got some projects in the works.

Before I turn completely positive, who fires someone right around christmas? I'm finding that I have to lie to my friends and to professonals about the conditions on the end of my employment because A. It makes me look like I did something really bad or B. It makes them look aweful.  It was a frustrating gig, but I really like the people that I worked with, and I really wanted to stay there for a lot longer.  They're publically looking for another developer to handle a python django project that I feel like I could have and should be on.  They sold me on culture, I bought into it, I asked for transparency and accepted when it wasn't given even when I was very transparent. Of the django devs I know that are local, I'm telling them about this gig and that they should reach out.  My family sent that person who I was friends with a christmas card.  I've forgiven them, and at the same time I don't know how to understand why they have decided to wrong me so.  It just reminds me that it's a gig economy: I saw the writing on the wall. The culture was shifting, I should have been looking for a job for a while and maybe left them with that project halfway done because they could have done what they did.  I'm not even sure if I could do that to someone.

If you've read this far, and you're thinking to employ me, you're probably thinking I have a lot of baggage, and if that's the case, that you're unwilling to look at the whole picture, then I probably don't want to work for you.  I don't need you. You need me, to fix a problem you don't want to solve.

My lesson learned: Be friendly but not friends with the people you work with that can get you hired or fired.

With that, I'm working on some things: I'll be giving a presentation on ngrx at the January PDX Angular meetup.  I was inspired by a presentation at the typescript meetup where the presentation got into using ngrx in nativescript.  It hit me at a good time, and it was a very stiff learning curve.  It's my intent to build a presentation that isn't so stiff.

Ngrx is Redux with RxJS or Observables, and it empowers you to write Angular 2 applicatons in a React like style.  You can write Angular 2 with the patterns of Angular 1, but honestly it's a lot better to use the reactive patterns, and in my honest opinion better than writing React. I've been looking at React and I'm not convinced, but if you want to pay me to write React, I'd be happy and excited.

So I'm going to code along with this presentation, which can be hard to pull off but I think I've got it figured out: Have a script, use a small but relevant example that shows the full power of Ngrx, and that example should be somehting you've already used several times. So I'm going to demo how to create a user registraton/login/logout with ngrx store and effects.  Some of the patterns I've picked up may not be 100% with what ngrx is about, but it's worked for me and I intend to blow some peoples minds in a context that says "I'm not saying this is the only way, but it worked for me and it's pretty amazing".  I'll use the angular cli, typescript, es6.  I'll briefly explain things that I don't intend to give much attention to like what "switchmap" operator in ngrx is, or what the `@Output` decorator means.  I'll show a pattern that works.  Maybe the lack of specificity and script will make me look more senior, but I feel senior for angular 2.  I want to be the idiot in the room, but I'm not convinced that there are very many people in pdx that understand angular 2 in this depth like I do.

So I needed a really simple api for this, because effects is often ignored when presentations on ngrx store are given and I want to show the full power of it.  I originally intended to let someone on my previous team to write one for me, then I thought about using what they had and that felt immoral and unethical.  I've been wanting to learn Flask, so that's what I've been doing. Coincidentally, I found a juniorish dev out of the bay area that's willing to learn more about rxjs and she's doing to the front-end.  

Honestly, I have a larger app in mind: Each christmas with my wife's family, we do a secret santa thing for the adults. She has several siblings with their own spouse, so grandma assigns everyone a secret santa, and everyone provides lists, and mostly the women do the shopping (yes, I got my wife a gift and I ordered things that my person wanted from their list...but I do not do gift cards).  Well, grandma get's a bunch of people's names on slips of papers on a bucket and draws them out, and often has to redo them a bunch because spouses can't have spouses.  And this sounds too perfect for an app.  On the way home last year, I glanced on the apple app store, and yes, there's already these apps.  So if grandma could be convinced to use one and everyone else to buy in, it'd have to be something I made just for them, and it would make a solid full stack app for my portofolio.  After working on this crud app, a lot of the patterns are the same, and I see possibilities for additional features, like wouldn't it be nice if a user could add items to their list and only their secret santa could see those items? How about adding messaging? Upload files like excel spreadsheet lists?  So there's features that could be built, but then why not also make this a mobile app with Ionic or Typescript? There's a lot of possibilities, but it all comes down to how much time I have, like how long can I stay unemployed.  

A couple days ago, another dev said they wanted to learn more about rxjs and was looking for help on a project. Well, I'm not an rxjs expert, but I'm fairly comfortable with it. A conversation started, and I've got a junior that's willing to work on the front end of this app and is willing to be open to my feedback. I'm writing the backend api, which is challenging but definately needed for my portfolio.  It seems to be coming together well.  Right now I have working endpoints for user registration and login, along with a get request to view all users. For now, it's a very generic "login/register/logout" api that I'd like to split off to be by itself for reuse. I've been itching to bust out the front end, as it's the holidays and people aren't working (as they shouldn't, but should be getting paid).  The front-end is coming along, I just created a separate slack channel with github integration so I can get pinged when this dev sends a pr.

That's kinda it.  I also just got out of the army.  I ended my 6 years of service honerably even though I wanted to be out for about the last 3 years.  My son is very cute and makes me smile and laugh all the time.  Our furnace recently went out...coincidentally the day after the fireplaces were serviced, so we have a cord of wood outside and the house actually feels warm.  My parents are a year away from retiring, and I don't know what they'll do when that happens. I guess I'm betting they might just travel around in their rv until they get sick of it.  Hopefully they stay busy and are less negative. My sister seems to be doing well but the less I know the better.  Katie is getting near the end of her life due to the canser.  Christmas is never the same since my grandparents died and I kinda miss being home for christmas even though it feels like being in Reno with Olivia's mom is the right thing to do.

I guess all I can hope for 2017 is that it goes as well as 2016.  I'm not as depressed about looking for work. My wife's job is going well, her schedule is about to change so she works monday, tuesday, wednesday, Saturday.  I've got a 2 month vanilla js gig that I might find out I'll get tomorrow or Tuesday.  It'd be great to get good enough at js from not having a framework to use and it'd be great to get back into a job when it's so hard this time of year, but the pay is low and the commute is bad.  I hope the friends I have now stay friends and I gain some more.  It'd be really nice if we can pay off as much debt as we did this year.  I'm really excited to not have a 2 week army tour to do, and I'm a week into growing a beard. It was a good thing to serve in the military, but I should have never done it.  The economy seems to be doing well, and my house may be cleaner since my wife got me one of those robot vacumn cleaners.

Oh and I need to revampt this site.  I've been thinking about going with something as easy as a wordpress theme that looks more thought-out and just show off a couple projects, like secretSanta.  Not sure if I'll keep the blogging. So I did the remote thing for 6 months, and the crazy paced startup for the last few months.  Lets see me with a coorporate gig that's consistent and maybe even some people I don't like but make it work for a good solid long time...like it would be great to have a job for a solid 12 months.  With all I learned in 2016, from writing es5, es6, python, php, lots of css and some sass, where will I be for 2018?