---
layout: post
title: "Ready for another contract"
date : 2016-06-06
---

### Original Post

My contract was ended about a week ago, on good terms.  I was told they didn't have enough work to keep me on any longer.  It's not fun losing a steady paycheck, but I was going in everyday expecting it to happen.  There hadn't been a lot of email development, and there has been a lot of other contractors that had left, so it was my turn. All in all, it was a really good experience.  It was my first, and certainly not last, gig at writing code everyday, all day, as a developer. I wasn't doing anything exciting, but it was challenging and I honed in on writing html and css.  When I had some spare time, I was able to contribute to a spa and I ended up completely refactoring the application so I can add credit to my resume as far as app development goes.  I created a smaller version of the app that I'm pretty happy with.  It's on my portfolio page, multipage-form, and it's up on gitHub.

I'm feeling pretty optimistic that I'll be able to find the next oppertunity without as much stuggle as I did before this contract. The first thing I did last week was contact all the recruiters that I knew and other connections that I had run into, and there's a few leads out there.  It'd be great if I could be back on the clock in the next week, which is mostly to keep my wife happy.

This is what I'm looking for: I'm a developer, not a designer, not management, not quality assurance.  I love working with code, the chrome dev tools, and a text editor.  Front-end work that involves Angular or/and backend work that involves node.js. I can build ui layouts from photoshop files, like I did with html emails, or from wireframes with css compilers like Sass and frameworks like Twitter Bootstrap or Angular Material. I'd also welcome the oppertunity to build cross platform apps with Ionic, NativeScript, or Electron. I'd also probably be good with refactoring an Anglar 1.x app over to Angular 2 due to the experience I've had with both and TypeScript.  Work with mongoDB would be even better since my skills have greatly improved in that area recently. 

Those are the areas that I can provide the greatest value to an employer. As far as culture, I'm not interested in working with a pc (I had one for the last 3 months.  They're great in their own ways, but I like working from terminal and I like the touchpad). I'd like to work with a manager that will take the interest in getting to know me and not expect me to be a social butterfly off the bat, and I've worked for enough managers that aren't professional.  I'm not interested in rocking any boats or asking for any degree of changes because I still have dues to pay. I'm fine with working as a contractor for the same reason, but I can't wait to be a valued permanant member of a team. My wife's work days don't have a hard stop time, so I need to be able to pick up my son from daycare. I'm open to working from home and can be just as effective.  I've got an office with a window and a Thunderbolt display that can be a little hard to pull me away from.

I'm definately willing to streach beyond those core areas, and I'd expected to be compensated less and to be supported more.  I'd love it if it were in areas like Angular 2, TypeScript, automated unit testing and other forms of testing. I'm also looking at adding in a module loader like Webpack or JSPM at some point. I'd also welcome working with another mvc like React or Ember.  I've heard a lot of support about the Ember community, so that might be worth looking into more, and Portland really seems to be latching on with React over Angular.  I'd like to spend some time with Python or Ruby, but unless I'm getting paid I'm not likely to jump in like I have with Angular or node.js.  I'm less inclined to do CMS work, but I'm sure I'd be successful with it.  I worked with PHP on the angular form, I've studied it along with the WordPress Codex.  It feels like I see a lot of job posts looking for experience with Java and asp.net so I'd love it if I could pick up some skills in those areas.  

I'm also feeling a lot more confident.  I've proven that I can write code that can go into production. Html emails was a great stepping stone for that, and I had a great project manager that helped me find my footing so I'm more capable of speaking up for what I can do, what I can't, when I need help, and what's realistic in a timeframe. I've become comfortable with fixing bugs, refactoring existing code, using JIRA to communicate with other steakholders, and tracking versions even if I'm not expected to. I worked iteratively, and I didn't push breaking changes. I maintained professional relationships with the people I worked for, and I couldn't even say a negative thing about anyone that I worked with. 

I was also persistent at pushing myself with professional development.  I found some time to work through some of the workshops on node school, so I feel a lot more confident about what I know and what I should study more.  Stream-adventure was great, and I need to run through it again. I also started looking at rest api's, and I feel a lot closer to being able to add that layer to small projects with a cloud based database, like [mLab](https://mlab.com/) and to start using Mongoose more.  

I also got involved with the Mongo University program.  They brought me on as a ta to proof their lectures, and to answer student questions on the forum.  It's a paid contract, and it's not very time intensive, so with the gap in full time work has given me the time to study MongoDB a lot more, but I can also make a full time gig work with this thing. I also got a discount on the Mongo Developer Certification Exam, so I'm studying a lot for that right now and hope to add that to my resume soon. From answering student's questions on the forum, it's also clear that I can mentor less experienced developers, which I had done before as a instructor at Portland Code School.  I was also teaching one of my coworkers at CMD version control with git, and pointing her to resources on javascript with occational clarifications on some of the weird parts.

Home life is really good right now.  My wife lost her job a few weeks ago. The situation was a little similar: She had worked at that place for a couple years, and had outgrown the clinic.  It was a great first gig but she was relieved when she was let go because it forced her to open herself to new oppertunities, and she had an easy time finding another employer that recognized her talent.  It feels like we've hit a stide with balancing work/finances/family.  That looks different for everyone.  For us, we both like our work, and our work compensates us so that we really enjoy the time off work. Our son is now crawling, and we just put him on the back of my bike.  He's got 4 teeth, and is starting to eat solids beyond pureed food.  It's hard to believe he's close to a year old.

### Update

I started a new job about a month ago, and I feel really lucky to have it.  I'm part of the Mercenary Tech team now and I think this could be a really good fit for a long time.  Mercenary works with small to midsize businesses to help build their applications.  It's everything I wanted to do and I love the culture.  Before when I was asked questions like what sort of culture would I want to work with, or the sort of boss I'd like to have, my values, and other long term goals, I had a hard time answering because I had been looking for stable work for so long.  I remember the crossroads vividly, but I can only say roughly it was a couple years ago when I dropped pushing the music and education and started searching for something different.  Now I can confidently say I like working on front-end development.  I like working with people that are smarter than me and make me feel like I have to defend my opinions and keep learning new things both relevant to the problems I need to solve for my employer and what intriques me.  Front-end development is really screwed up right now, and there's some amazing tools out there like Webpack, Typescript, System.js, Gulp, Sass, Mocha.  

So I'm teaching myself Python. I'm back on Treehouse watching videos as a starting point to learning the syntax and eventually get introduced into the frameworks like Django.  I haven't seen very much backend javascript and mongoDB.  I don't love design, I'll tolerate writing css, and I'm not dying to become amazing at css preprocessors (but I know I need to work on that).  I like reactive spas, and I'm working on an angular 1 app so I know my way around it, I'm getting a lot more familiar with the inner parts, and I can't wait to spend more time with angular 2 with typescript and es6.  I'm working with a remote based team, but I have access to work from a really great office in the Pearl.  Some of the members of the team are different, so I'm pushed out of my comfort zone to the extent that I'm ok with.  Again, I'm really lucky to be on such a talented team, and I think Mercenary is going to become very successful in the near future.  My employer is a learder, not a manager, and previously an engineer.  He comes from a farming family in Eastern Oregin, with a formal education in computer science, and for me I have an easy time to relate to possibly because I share some of his values like integrity, hard work, passion, family, maybe business. 

I've also been talking and throwing leads to some friends that are looking for work.  It feels like a lot of luck.  I met my current employer personally on a call when my 5 month old son sleeping in a rocker.  Nothing came out, and ironically he hired the spouse to the guy at another company that I was able to start working for.  That guy got fired, and ended up telling mercenary about me.  Portland is a small town, so it's hard to get started, and once people have an opinion on you, that's what you get stuck with, which is good and bad.  The same was the case for education, and when I screwed that up, I burned my bridges.  I hope I don't have to do that again.  

In summary, I'm part of a development team that does consultant type work.  I expect to be working on similar type projects with varying levels of quality of code, with the expectation to solve the client's problems with the least amount of code in the most effective ways.  Right now, that's what I've been looking for the last few years. I'm hoping I can become as effective writing Python as I was with node, and that I can get enough experience with this gig so that when I'm ready to move on, I won't be looking too hard for work.  The reality is that the tech bubble is going to pop soon.  There's a lot of student devs, juniors, and sloppy intermediate devs that are going to lose their jobs, and they're not going to have enough credibility to ride it out for the next gig to come along.  It feels like the only way to avoid that filter is to do good work and make yourself valuable to your employer/clients.

