---
layout: post
title: "Last post"
date : 2018-03-10
---

This will be the last blog I publish for this site.

I've replaced this site with [nathanbrenner.com](www.nathanbrenner.com)

From the start of this project, I wasn't ever excited about how it looked. I never had any vision on some general theme, so it's always looked pretty boring. Occassionally, I would go on a rant in a blog, or add some educational content based off of something else I was doing at the time.

I never really wanted to maintain or regularly publish blogs. I don't really want to teach to a large audience or be anything like a thought leader. I like writing code, occassionally helping others write code, build cool stuff for the web, and keep a private life.

There were some other problems with this site. I built it right out of code school in hope it would get me work, so I put every student project up on github and created an angularjs app on the portfolio section of this site, which I haven't maintained. That page had a lot of half written apps that could probably be deleted.

Also, the resume on this site was difficult to update with the Word version that recruiters only seemed to care about.

[nathanbrenner.com](www.nathanbrenner.com) is a very simple single page portfolio. I got a theme from the open source, and I categered it to my own in a couple hours. It's there to get people to contact me. It's got 3 refurals (which are the same on my linkedIn profile), 3 past or current projects, a brief description and a picture of me, and how to contact me. That's it.

I also got over my fear of launching. I bought a domain name from godaddy, created an aws account, uploaded the files to s3, added a cloudfront distribution as a cdn, and connected route53 to the domain name. Some of this I had learned at my last gig, but it shows I can actually do stuff on aws.

It needs some work though. The theme I pulled was using npm to manage jquery, a jquery plugin for scrolling, and bootstrap 4, all of which can be provided with a cdn. It's also using gulp to minify the script and compile the sass. I don't think any of that is really necessary.

It could be cool to break up the long index.html with some react components, and add in a simple webpack config.

I also want to automate the build with a script on a cicd, just so when I push up changes, s3 get's updated and the live site get's updated automatically.

These tasks a lot easier to maintain than some big jekyll site.

One last thing, the resume available on this site will no longer be the current version. I realized about a week ago that thing had gotten way bloated. There's probably a half page for each job. I've reduced that to 2, and the most relevant content is near the top of the first page. I can tell you about the rest if you want, but you'll just have to ask me. I think a resume should exist for the purpose of looking at for no more than 10 seconds to decide if you want talk to me, or to pass.

I'm not taking this site down, because maybe I'll use it for something else later, but I'm not refuring to it as my portfolio any longer. I suppose you could consider it my junior developer portfolio.