---
layout: post
title: "2017 recap"
date : 2017-02-11
---

It's been a while since I last wrote one of these (10 months) and I was listening to my favorite podcast this morning (Frontend Happy Hour) on my drive to work and I found myself reflecting on the last year.

2017 was a really good year for me. To understand, we have to start with context.  2016 ended with me unemployed, finances weren't great but moving in the right direction, pdx had gotten a ton of snow, my furnace went out, I was in the army, and trump was elected.

Well..my tenure with the army ended in late december. I had hated it for the last three years, so I proptly stopped shaving and felt a huge sigh of relief. I had given up music and teaching 2 years ago and I was only giving minimal effort to play in the army band when most of what they had me doing was baritone sax in a rock band (could you make me want out any less?). There were also some spectacular personalities in that group that I was thrilled to never have to see again.  Needless to say, I bit my toungue a lot for the last 3 years. So 2017 meant no more of that horseshit, even though I had 2 years where they could call me back if say...hey some guy on twitter declared war on north korea.

My family went to Reno to see family for christmas and I lied about my current work, but I came back to pdx with a job interview. I actually got the job, through a recruter I had worked for. With that good news, I went snowboarding for 2 days (background check was taking forever).  The gig was on the otherside of town, it was short term (two months), and it paid significantly less than any other coding job I've had at that point.  But a friend of mine (who was also looking for a job, we'll call him Bob to protect his innocense) had a friend (we'll call him Mark) who just got a job at a startup and needed angular devs, so he hired Bob and Bob (being the good friend he was) told him immediately of me.  The interview process was my kind: Here's the problem, we're a startup but fully funded, and we can pay you (coincidentally more than the last gig I had) so I left the contract with 2 weeks notice.  It was a risk, I kept working my ass off at that gig for 2 weeks even though I thought it would be fine to leave them screwed because of my previous experiences. Ironically the pr didn't pursue hiring someone else to replace me so he made his shitty situation worse and from what I was left to know he had to take on my work when I left.

The startup I joined was in a tiny office not too far from the other place I was working (which actually worked for the interview process) and was in constant remodeling while I was there. So the commute was bad (over 1.5 hour one way), but I was working with tools I knew (Angular). I showed up to 3 guys working on the front end of this app, and over the course of the following months I rewrote everything they did that was wrong (template based forms to start, and super bloated components). This isn't so much about the awful code I inheirited, but the problems I solved from starting with existing code and getting it to work.  It started with user registration with Auth0 lock for authentication, along with the requirement for custom validation (reactive forms became a huge hit for me and I'll never default to writing a form in angular in any other way). I worked with Bob on this for a bit, then he got switched to a related app. The boss put another dev on the backend (we'll call this kid Mars).  He was young, had done some cs studying at a community college but had been around the longest. There was also a designer (Lewis).  Mars and Lewis worked for the most part next to my boss, so it was a few months of me working without being told what to work on before I got to know them. That actually worked for me.

Well, this is the good news part: I'm still working there.  We changed locations in September. My commute time dropped significantly. Parking was an issue, and there's a lot of homeless people around, but the office is great: Huge amount of space around me, lots of natural light, and I can still hear most conversations between my boss and the owner.  The app I mostly maintain has paying users (like if you want to use the app, you have to pay to use it). It's not profitable yet, but that's coming.

My friend Bob left the company over 3 months ago.  We both had been frustrated with our boss. At one point, I was expected to do overtime and I drew the line in the sand with offers on the table. I confronted my boss, and we found room for agreement. I ended up working that weekend out of my own choice and the app moved forward. Bob however didn't do this. Instead, he interviewed around, distanced himself from the team, and wrote a lot of shitty code.  He got a job offer and left...and I had to clean up his mess. That took roughly 3 months. It was miserable work. Lewis had also left (he didn't get along with the boss either, but a shorter commute and huge pay raise influenced him too) so the designer wasn't around (as if he ever gave me valuable feedback.  He spent most of his time designing another app while I was usually told to "do it like the other app"). We hired on two more devs. I found 2 guys, my boss interviewed them both and let them join, but only one stuck around. At that point, I decided I should probably watch over the development of stuff that I might have to take over if they leave. I was hired to manage and mentor other devs while writing maintainable code. I had given my friend a lot of room, and he ended up not asking and when he did I usually snapped at him because I was neck deep into the work I was doing. Lesson learned: I did my friend a disservice: He needed me to review his code for him, and I didnt' take ownership of his code. Maybe I alienated him, and I definately grew the feeling like he was bad at his work.  He left for another start up from what I can tell, he would be the lead dev. I doubt he would be successful based on his past experience.

Back to those two guys I found: It's really hard to find good devs. I wanted to find someone that could jump into this thing and fix my problems. I wanted them to be as willing to jump in as I had been and willing to not need feed back. Here's the problem: Fix it. Do a better job that I would do so I can focus on other things.  Apperently, in this town, that makes you a senior level developer. I had been in several places where that was what I was expected to. I hadn't been in places where there were code reviews. There were short deadlines with high expectations.  So if you want to be a dev, you need some resilience. One of those 2 stuck around for a bit, but he lacked experience and thought he was below writing good css and html.  The other wasn't a team player and didn't waste as much of my time.

My wife and I went to Hawaii for 2 weeks. It was the first time since the honeymoon that we took a real vacation. Her wonderful mother watched our son. We had a great time snorkeling, beach hoping, and eating good sushi. I left with the feeling that I couldn't wait to come back.

Not long after I had come back, I finished the big refactor on the mess. This might be a good time to mention other accomplishments: Along with learning to write good reactive forms, I learned how to write unit tests for angular, I figured out abstract classes, and I have to say it again I had a job for more than 6 months with a paid vacation (and later a huge christmas bonus and holiday party). I was secretly working on a huge refactor that brough in ngrx to manage state, but my app was stable. When bugs resurfaced, I was able to fix them fast and I'm really proud of the work I've done on this app. Now I had also cleaned up this other app. We had another remote contractor that I was now also managing: I review his code every morning, and we meet on google hangouts briefly.  I started out strictly micromanaging him and that's moved to less as he has proven himself. He's been a huge help.

I also foolishly bought a 2017 Dodge Charger r/t.  It's a badass car, I had been eyeing them for the past few years, and the commute was terrible with manual trasmission. I had conquered manual transmission, but was ready to go back to automatic. I bought the car in April, was able to afford it, and it's been a lot of fun.

Finances have been great this year.  With two full time parents both making over 80k salary, we've paid off most our consumer debt. 2018 is looking like we might be making another tiny human, and if I can make more money with that addition, my wife might decide to work a little less (which I would love). We've got credit cards that we don't have debt that's passing on each month, and we're deep in the green each month (which we were able to do things like Hawaii without blinking an eye). Thank you to employers that care about the work we do.

I can't say enough good things about the people I work with.  We have a bunch of sales people that continue to recognize and respect the work I do, I've settled on how I feel about my boss and I actually like him more than not. The owner is great and I love that he's so easy to work with. The guy drives a tesla and has a really interesting personality, and treats the people that work for him really well. He's covered the cost for me to go to ng-conf next April, which I'm really excited about.

Occassionaly, I'll look at other oppertunities. I interviewed at another company, but it was a huge waste of my time.  I had 3 job interviews in 2017 and I won 2 of them.  Next job offer I get, I'll probably use it as leverage to get a raise, but to be honest, I'd rather make my company a lot of money before I ask for stuff like that.  If anything, it'd be great if my backend dev gets more. His year was tough, but he's young and bouncing back.

What do I want for 2018? Potty training! My kid is amazing. He's saying multiple word sequences, he's full of smiles, laughs, and he's the joy of my life.

Christmas was hard..what do you want when you have more than you ever wanted? We stayed in town, my wife couldn't get the time off work. It was actually kinda nice to stay in town for christmas.

It would be great to see my company sky rocket over the next year. I know I'm being selfish, but I want to not have to job hunt at all this year. I could continue to rant, but this seems good enough for now. Thank you for such a wonderful year.